# 微观经济学

授课老师：梁远宁

由于上学期已经修过中微，这学期的微观经济学笔记就简写，只关注陌生部分和主干部分。

笔记与课堂一致，使用英文。

## Lecture 2: Math Review

**Young's theorem**: the order in which partial differentiation is conducted to evaluate second-order partial derivatives doesn't matter.
$$
f_{ij} = f_{ji}
$$
**First-order condition for a maximum**: a necessary condition for a point to be a local maximum is
$$
f_1 = f_2 = ... = f_n
$$
This condition is not sufficient.

A logarithmic transformation of this equation ($y = ax^b$) provides a convenient alternative definition of elasticity.
$$
\ln y = \ln a + b\ln x\\
e_{y,x} = \frac{d\ln y}{d\ln x} = b
$$
**Implicit function theorem** (隐函数定理): suppose that $z = f(x,y) = c$,  we have created an implicit relationship between x and y, $y = g(x)$. Using the chain rule, we get $0 = f_x + f_y \frac{dg(x)}{dx}$, thus
$$
\frac{dg(x)}{dx} = \frac{dy}{dx} = - \frac{f_x}{f_y}
$$
**The envelope theorem**: the change in the optimal value of a function with respect to a parameter of that function, can be found by partially differentiating the objective function while holding x (or several x's) at its optimal value.
$$
\frac{dy^*}{da} = \frac{\partial y}{\partial a}|_{x = x^*(a)}
$$
For example, $y = -x^2 + ax$, $\frac{dy^*}{da} = \frac{\partial (-x^2 + ax)}{a}|_{x = x^*(a)} = x^*(a) = \frac{a}{2}$.

**Constrained maximization: Lagrange multiplier method**

Find the values of $x_1, x_2, ..., x_n$ that maximize $y = f(x_1, x_2, ...,x_n)$, subject to a constraint on x's $g(x_1, x_2, ..., x_n)$.

Set up the Lagrangian expression
$$
\mathcal{L} = f(x_1, x_2, ..., x_n) + \lambda g(x_1, x_2, ..., x_n)
$$
$\lambda$ is the Lagrange multiplier.

When the constraint holds (or the constraint is binding), $\mathcal{L} = f$.

Finding the constrained maximum value of $f$ is equivalent to finding a critical value of $\mathcal{L}$

**Interpretation of the Lagrange multiplier**: rewrite the first-order conditions as
$$
\frac{f_1}{-g_1} = \frac{f_2}{-g_2} = ... = \frac{f_n}{-g_n} = \lambda
$$
The numerator is the marginal benefit that one more unit of $x_i$ will have for the function $f$. The denominators is the added burden (or marginal cost) on the constraint of using more $x_i$.

At the optimal choices for the x's, the ratio $\frac{f_i}{-g_i}$ should be the same. $\lambda$ is the **common cost-benefit ratio**.

$\lambda$ is called a "**shadow price**" to the constraint: a high value of $\lambda$ means y could be increased substantially by relaxing constraint.

**Duality**: Any constrained **maximization** problem has associated with it a dual problem in constrained **minimization**.

| Original Problem                                            | Dual Problem                                                 |
| ----------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Individuals maximize utility subject to a budget constraint | Individual minimize the expenditure needed to achieve a given level of utility. |

